# plastic-biofilm-genomics
2.1. Sample incubation setting
The fieldis study occurred was conductedwithin the Lafayette River (Fig 1a),  a tidal tributary of the southern Chesapeake Bay located within Norfolk, Virginia, USA (Fig 1b). The Chesapeake Bay ecosystem is supported by a diverse assemblage of diatoms throughout the year, as well as chlorophytes, cyanobacteria, cryptophytes, and dinoflagellates (Marshall et al., 2005). In situ incubations occurred around the middle of the Lafayette River (36°52’46”N 76°16’08”W), and in vitro incubations within using Lafayette River water in our lab at ODU (Fig 1a). 
2.1.1. In situ incubations
In order to examine the community composition in situ, a rectangular rig was created from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tubing in the dimensions of 35.6x35.6x122 cm³ (Fig 1c). Ten sheets of 30.5x30.5x0.15 cm³ ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) (McMaster-Carr, product #8752K121) were washed thoroughly with Micro-90 soap and ultra-pure water. UHMWPE was selected as the test material due to the ubiquity of PE in use and the environment, as well as its densities in proximity to that of seawater (Supp. Fig. 1). A template was created and printed in a 30.5x30.5cm² format to define cutting lines for different types of analyses (Fig 1d). Then the plastic sheets were placed over the template, taped in place at their corners, and lines were scored with a hobby knife, deep enough to remain visible during the incubation but not so deep as to cut through or weaken the sheet. Holes were punched in the corners to attach the sheets. Each sheet was then hung in the center of the rig with two zip ties attaching each corner to a rail, and approximately 10 cm between each sheet (Fig 1c). The rig was then tied to a floating dock at a depth of ~1 m on the Lafayette River on December 14th, 2020. The water temperature and salinity during sampling ranged from 2-13 °C and 6-11 PSU and experienced a 0.5-1 m semidiurnal tide. These tides lead to an average residence time of 180 days for the entire estuary, however, the study site’s proximity to the mouth means it has a much shorter residence time of ~40 days (Du and Shen, 2016); therefore, an incubation period of 7 weeks approximates the residence time at this location.
 Two sheets each were randomly selected, then collected and processed at each of 24 hours, 1 week, 3 weeks, 5 weeks, and 7 weeks. During sample collection, one sheet was removed from the water at a time and hung from metal hooks by one of the holes so that none of the surfaces touched anything during sampling. Tabs of different sizes were cut along scoring lines with heavy duty tin snips; where needed, pliers were used to hold the sheet in place by gripping discard areas only (Fig 1d). Due to occasional air exposure of a portion of the sheets at low tides, the development of the biofilm was uneven, with the highest growth towards the bottom. Therefore, some upper sections of the incubated plastic were not used for analysis (Fig 12d,e). Samples were processed according to their stability, with ATP and pigments first, followed by lipids, genomics, microscopy, and silica. ATP samples were immediately stored in cryovials pre-filled with 1ml of phosphoric acid benzalkonium chloride (P-BAC) extractant and continuously inverted for 30 seconds, then extracted for approximately an hour before they were stored at -80°C (Bochdansky et al., 2021). Samples for pigments, lipids, genomics, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) pigment analysis were stored in 30 mL glass vials, and silica samples were stored in 50 mL falcon tubes. Optical microscopy samples were wiped on one side with a paper towel and affixed to a petri dish with two-sided tape. Samples were kept in a cooler with ice packs for approximately an hour until they were placed in a -80°C freezer. 
